ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 
Procedia CIRP 74 (2018) 5–11
2212-8271 © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the Bayerisches Laserzentrum GmbH.
10.1016/j.procir.2018.08.002
© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Peer-review under responsibility of the Bayerisches Laserzentrum GmbH.
Keywords: Selective Laser Melting (SLM); Base plate preheating
1. Introduction
Selective 
Laser 
Melting 
(SLM) 
is 
an 
Additive 
Manufacturing (AM) technique in which thin layers of metal 
powder material are selectively molten by a laser, layer after 
layer. There is an increasing industrial demand for a larger 
pallet of materials that can be applied in SLM.
One of the main difficulties, which impedes the SLM
material development, originates from the large thermal 
stresses that occur in SLM parts due to the high thermal 
gradients. This thermal stress issue can potentially be resolved 
by elevating the temperature of the base plate during the 
fabrication, hence reducing temperature gradients during SLM 
[1-3].
This addition of preheating during SLM has proven to be
promising for several cases where cracks could be prohibited 
[1], residual stresses were decreased [3] and/or mechanical 
properties improved [4]. This can, however, also affect other 
material properties or characteristics. To better illustrate these 
effects, the research presented here gives an overview of the 
effect of preheating on a variety of SLM part characteristics 
such 
as 
density,
internal 
stresses, 
crack 
formation,
microstructure and mechanical properties. The corresponding 
drawbacks, originating from long exposure of SLM materials
to elevated preheating temperatures, are also demonstrated.
Within this research, four materials are examined:
•
The first material is the high strength aluminum alloy 
Al7075 containing 5.1-6.1wt% Zn, 2.1-2.9wt% Mg and 
1.2-2wt% Cu. Because of its high specific strength, this 
alloy is mainly used for automotive and aerospace 
applications. After SLM production, Al7075 parts, 
however, suffer from crack formation [5].
•
The nickel alloy Hastelloy X (chemical composition in 
Table 1) is often used in high temperature applications 
such as gas turbines. Depending on its exact chemical 
composition [6] and on the SLM parameters used, this 
material also suffers from cracking.
Application of base plate preheating during selective laser melting
R. Mertensa*, S. Dadbakhsha, J. Van Humbeeckb, J.-P. Krutha
aKU Leuven, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Member of Flanders Make, Celestijnenlaan 300 box 2420, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
bKU Leuven, Department of Materials Engineering, Kasteelpark Arenberg 44 box 2450, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +32-163-773-21. E-mail address: raya.mertens@kuleuven.be
- Keynote Paper -
Abstract
Base plate preheating is one of the recent enhancing tools added to the process of Selective Laser Melting (SLM). This tool aims at a reduction 
of thermal stresses in SLM parts, achieved by decreasing the thermal gradients during SLM processing. In the current study, base plate 
preheating up to a temperature of 400°C is applied during SLM of 4 different materials, including aluminum 7075 alloy, nickel alloy Hastelloy
X, H13 tool steel and CoCr. General trends, as well as material specific effects are discussed regarding part density, crack formation, internal 
stresses, microstructure and mechanical properties. These show how base plate preheating can induce different influences according to each 
particular material category.
10th CIRP Conference on Photonic Technologies [LANE 2018]
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

6
R. Mertens  et al. / Procedia CIRP 74 (2018) 5–11
•
H13 (chemical composition in Table 1) is a hot working 
tool steel with a high hardness and wear resistance, a
good thermal fatigue performance and high toughness 
and strength at elevated temperatures. This material can 
be processed through SLM without major difficulties. It 
was, however, shown that the application of preheating 
largely influences the microstructure and mechanical 
properties of SLM H13 tool steel [4].
•
Lastly, CoCr (27-30wt% Cr and 5-7wt% Mo) combines 
good corrosion resistance (even at elevated temperatures)
with mechanical properties comparable to stainless steel. 
It is often used in industrial as well as biomedical 
applications. Extensive research has been performed on 
SLM of CoCr [7-10].
Table 1. Chemical composition of Hastelloy X and H13 tool steel.
Wt%
Ni
Fe
Cr
Mo
Co
Si
V
W
C
HX
Bal. 17-20
20.5-23
8-10
1.5-2.5
<1
-
0.6-1 0.05-0.07
H13
-
≥91
5.13-5.25 1.33-1.4
-
1
1
-
0.32-0.4
2. Methods
For the SLM production, Materialise Magics software was 
used for the file preparation and an in-house developed SLM-
machine of KU Leuven was used for part production. The 
SLM machine is equipped with a Yb:YAG fiber laser with a 
maximum output power of 300W and a beam diameter d1/e² of 
50µm. Base plate preheating was applied using a resistive 
heating element underneath the base plate. The temperature is 
controlled within ± 0.5°C using a thermocouple attached to 
the heating element and a PID control loop. Since the 
temperature is only measured underneath the base plate, the 
temperature may vary depending on the part height. However, 
the limited height of most parts in this work, i.e. 10mm, 
guarantees a relatively homogeneous temperature throughout 
the build height. 
For all materials, a parameter optimization was performed 
using the power (P) and scan speed (v) ranges as illustrated in 
Table 2. Furthermore, preheating was applied up to 400°C. 
Layer thickness and hatch spacing were kept constant at 
respectively 30µm and 105µm.
Table 2. Investigated parameter ranges to optimize the SLM process for all 
four materials.
Material
Power [W]
Scan speed [mm/s]
Al7075
100-300
500-1500
Hastelloy X
120-270
400-1600
H13 tool steel
120-220
400-2000
CoCr
150-300
200-1400
3. Results and discussion
Each of the following paragraphs describes the effect of 
base plate preheating on one of the material characteristics. 
Density, crack formation, internal stresses, microstructure and 
mechanical properties are analyzed in depth. In a last section, 
the influence of extended exposure to elevated temperatures is 
described for Hastelloy X.
3.1. Density
Fig. 1 shows the Archimedes density of H13 tool steel 
parts produced using different laser power and scan speed, 
and using different preheating temperatures. First of all, it 
should be noted that the variation caused by preheating
(within this limited range of applied preheating temperatures)
is small in comparison to the influence of other process 
parameters such as laser power and scan speed.
Furthermore, application of preheating contributes to the 
total energy input required to densify the material. When the 
combination of scan speed and laser power results in low 
density, application of preheating leads to an increase of the 
part density (Fig. 2). Fig. 3 shows an example where full 
density (>99.5%) was obtained by using a higher preheating 
temperature.
Fig. 1. Relative density graph of H13 tool steel parts produced by SLM (t = 
30µm; h = 105µm).
However, when laser energy input is adequate in order to 
obtain a dense SLM part, addition of preheating might result 
in an excess of the total energy input, enlarging the melt pool 
size and increasing melt pool instabilities. This can decrease 
the part density as occurred for H13 tool steel when a power 
of 220W and scan speed of 1200 or 1600mm/s is applied (Fig. 
1). In this case, density values decreased when the preheating 
temperature increased from 200°C to 400°C.
In the excessive laser energy region, when low scan speeds 
are applied (scan speed of 400mm/s in Fig. 1), parts suffer 
from keyhole porosity (Fig. 5 shows examples of keyhole 
porosity for Hastelloy X). In this region, there is no clear 
trend in the effect of preheating. The part density is, however, 
insufficient for all applied preheating temperatures.
Finally, a parameter window can be defined in which dense 
parts are obtained for all examined preheating temperatures 
within the considered temperature range. For H13 tool steel, a 
parameter set consisting of a power of 220W and scan speed 
of 800mm/s without and with preheating up to 400°C shows 
maximum part density results. It is worth mentioning that 
comparable trends are observed for all investigated materials 
since part density is rather process related.
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

R. Mertens  et al. / Procedia CIRP 74 (2018) 5–11
7
Fig. 2. Optical microscopy images of Hastelloy X specimens (side view) with 
increasing preheating temperature (P = 170W; v = 1600mm/s).
Fig. 3. Optical microscopy images of Hastelloy X produced at P = 170W and 
v = 1200mm/s with varying preheating temperature. The remaining porosity 
is indicated by red circles.
3.2. Internal stresses and crack formation
The main motivation to apply preheating during the SLM 
process is the possible reduction in thermal stresses. This 
reduction was quantified by Vrancken et. al. for the titanium 
alloy Ti6Al4V. A reduction of 50% in residual stresses was 
found when a preheating temperature of 400°C was applied 
[3].
Such a reduction in thermal stresses is beneficial for the 
overall stability of SLM parts, especially in high demanding 
load applications since large internal stresses might lead to 
geometrical deformations and premature failure. In the 
extreme cases, such internal stresses can even induce 
macrocracks developing in SLM parts. This has been well 
demonstrated by Kempen et. al. as the large macrocracks in
SLM M2 tool steel parts without preheating have been 
successfully diminished by application of preheating at 300°C 
[1].
In addition to large macrocracks, smaller microcracks can 
also form in the SLM materials. For example, in the case of 
high strength aluminum alloys such as Al7075, microcracks 
can abundantly form after SLM processing without preheating 
(Fig. 4). Although the application of preheating largely 
reduces this cracking behavior, it fails to completely prevent 
the microcrack formation, as Fig. 4 still shows the presence of 
large cracks after use of preheating at 400°C. This change in 
crack behavior
can be attributed to the precipitation 
phenomena of the main
strengthening phase (MgZn2),
occurring at temperatures below 300°C [5]. 
Without application of preheating, the temperature of the 
freshly solidified material decreases below 300°C during the 
SLM process. This allows precipitates (such as MgZn2) to 
form during production, which consequently may embrittle 
the material. This together with the high thermal stresses 
induced by SLM (which are intensified for this alloy due to its 
broad solidification interval and large thermal expansion)
leads to the abundant formation of microcracks throughout the 
entire part. 
In contrast, when the freshly solidified material is kept at 
an elevated temperature of 400°C, the situation changes 
completely. Mg and Zn will both remain in solid solution and 
the formation of MgZn2 precipitates is postponed until after 
the SLM process. The embrittlement is therefore avoided, 
reducing the fine branched cracking. However, thermal 
stresses during SLM and after cooling down are still
sufficiently high to cause cracks (despite the cracking 
significantly reduces after the application of preheating, as 
seen in Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. Optical microscopy images of Al7075 parts produced at different 
preheating temperatures.
The nickel alloy Hastelloy X also suffers from crack 
formation after SLM processing. Hastelloy X, however, does 
not have a phase transformation occurring in the range of the
applied preheating temperatures. Furthermore, and related to 
this, it was found that preheating up to 400°C does not have a 
significant effect on crack formation in Hastelloy X parts.
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

8
R. Mertens  et al. / Procedia CIRP 74 (2018) 5–11
It should be noted that in addition to preheating, the 
applied parameter set can significantly alter the cracking. For 
example, high laser energy inputs can lead to the formation of 
excessively deep melt pools in SLM processed Hastelloy X 
(Fig. 5). Solidification of these deep melt pools develops from 
the sides towards the middle. As a result, cracks appear 
vertically, in the middle of the melt pool where the two 
solidification fronts (from left and right) should meet. In 
comparison, a lower laser energy parameter set leads to a 
shallower melt pool which can prevent cracking to a large 
extent even without preheating (as previously shown in Fig. 
3a). Addition of the preheating to such a parameter set not 
only 
completely 
diminishes 
the 
cracking, 
but 
also 
significantly improves the density (Fig. 3c).
Fig. 5. Optical microscopy image (side view) of a Hastelloy X specimen 
produced using high laser energy without preheating (P = 270W; v = 
400mm/s).
It should, however, be noted that for some materials, a 
reverse effect on internal stresses can occur. For H13 tool 
steel, for example, compressive stresses are commonly found 
at the outer surfaces of the parts after SLM production due to 
the volume increase during the martensitic transformation in
the material. It was however found that higher preheating 
temperatures prohibit such a martensitic transformation (as 
will be discussed more in depth in section 3.3). Therefore, 
internal stresses evolved from a compressive nature without 
preheating to tensile after application of preheating, as shown 
in Fig. 6 [4].
Fig. 6. Maximal principal stress measured in H13 SLM parts produced at 
different preheating temperatures. Residual stresses are measured in-plane on 
the top surface of SLM cubes using XRD.
On the contrary, for CoCr, a material without phase 
transformations below 400°C (as will be discussed in section 
3.3), no significant difference in residual stresses at the outer 
surface of SLM parts was measured, as illustrated in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. Maximal principal stress measured in CoCr SLM parts produced at 
different preheating temperatures. 6 measurements were performed without 
preheating (95% confidence interval shown), 2 with preheating at 400°C 
(single measurements shown).
3.3. Microstructure and mechanical properties
Applying preheating influences the thermal history of the 
material and might therefore influence the microstructure of 
the parts. This influence is not equal for all materials, as it 
depends on the transformation temperatures of the phases and 
the melting points of the materials.
When a
phase 
transformation or precipitation is possible
below the 
preheating temperature, significant changes are obtainable
depending on the preheating temperature. However, when 
such transformations only occur
above the preheating 
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

R. Mertens  et al. / Procedia CIRP 74 (2018) 5–11
9
temperature, microstructural variations due to preheating are 
smaller or non-existing.
Fig. 8 shows a first example, as Al7075 is largely affected 
by preheating. As seen from Fig. 8, in parts produced without 
preheating, melt pool boundaries are clearly visible in the 
microstructure. These melt pools are visible due to the cell 
size differences at the melt pool borders and interiors [5]. This 
can be enhanced due to the precipitation in the heat affected 
zone of each melt pool. The precipitates are mainly MgZn2
particles forming below 300°C for this alloy [5]. However, at 
a preheating temperature of 400°C, Zn and Mg fully dissolve 
in the aluminum matrix, prohibiting the formation of MgZn2
precipitates in the melt pool. As a result, the melt pool borders 
fade and a more uniform microstructure appears (Fig. 8).
Fig. 8. Optical microscopy images of etched Al7075 parts produced using 
different base plate preheating temperatures (P = 270W; v = 1100mm/s).
As a second example, the effect of preheating up to 400°C 
on the microstructural and mechanical properties of SLM 
made H13 tool steel is presented [4]. For this steel, the 
austenite-martensite transformation temperature is about
300°C. Application of a preheating temperature below this 
critical temperature results in a largely tempered martensitic 
microstructure 
after 
SLM. 
When 
higher 
preheating 
temperatures are applied, on the other hand, the material 
remains in its austenitic state during the SLM process. 
Afterwards, during cooling down to room temperature, a 
bainitic microstructure forms and a low fraction of austenite 
retains. This bainitic microstructure is only slightly tempered 
after cooling down to room temperature at the end of the 
process (in contrast to the highly tempered martensite formed 
during SLM without preheating). Therefore, parts with this 
bainitic microstructure, obtained via SLM at 400°C, possess a
higher hardness and a higher ultimate tensile strength 
compared to parts produced without preheating, as illustrated 
in Fig. 9. To further analyze and predict such phenomena, one 
may study the Continuous Cooling Transformation (CCT) 
curves of a particular steel before selecting the preheating 
temperature for SLM processing.
Fig. 9. Tensile stress-strain curves for SLM-produced H13 using different 
preheating temperatures [4].
The two previous examples showed materials that are to a 
large extend affected by preheating up to 400°C. In a contrary 
case, CoCr is investigated. For CoCr, no precipitation or 
transformation normally occurs below 400°C that influence 
the properties. In fact, CoCr only undergoes an FCC to HCP 
transformation around 1000°C, leading to a stable hexagonal 
structure below this temperature. However, due to the fast 
cooling during SLM, the metastable FCC phase largely 
remains at room temperature. Interestingly, the amount/type 
of this metastable FCC structure is not significantly 
influenced by preheating up to 400°C. This can be seen in Fig. 
10 where the XRD diffraction pattern shows similar peaks in 
the two different cases. As a result, no significant effect on 
tensile properties was obtained (Fig. 11).
Fig. 10. X-ray diffraction patterns for CoCr parts produced without 
preheating (NP) and with a preheating temperature of 400°C.
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

10
R. Mertens  et al. / Procedia CIRP 74 (2018) 5–11
Fig. 11. Tensile stress-strain curves for SLM-produced CoCr using different 
preheating temperatures.
Despite the comparable phases in the SLM CoCr parts 
made with or without preheating (Fig. 10), there is however a
difference in their texture as the intensity of the peaks is 
different. In fact, the (200) FCC peak at 2θ = 51° is more 
pronounced when a preheating temperature of 400°C is 
applied. This means that preheating intensifies the texture in 
the (200) direction, which is regularly observed in SLM parts 
due to the layered build [8, 11, 12]. This can be attributed to 
deeper melt pools when preheating is applied.
3.4. Long exposure to preheating temperature
One of the concerns regarding the application of preheating 
is the effect of prolonged exposure to a certain preheating 
temperature. Within this research, a significant effect was 
observed after long exposure to a temperature of 400°C for 
nickel alloy Hastelloy X, as the microstructure was different 
at the bottom and the top of a 90mm high part that was 
SLMed for 32 hours. In fact, 32 hours of preheating at 400°C 
significantly coarsened the grain structure, as shown in Fig.
12. The coarser microstructure at the bottom of the part is 
visible in as built parts, but becomes more clear in heat treated
parts (solution
treatment at 1200°C, followed by air 
quenching).
This is very remarkable since the alloy does not have low 
temperature phase transformations (as discussed earlier), and 
especially
since this
alloy is
also
used for
elevated 
temperature applications. Analyzing the effect of long 
exposure to preheating temperatures is in particular important 
for industrial applications, as large parts will require long 
production times.
Fig. 12. Optical microscopy images of 90mm tall SLM Hastelloy X bars
made in the vertical direction using a preheating at 400°C (side view). The 
pictures are taken before and after a solution heat treatment at 1200°C.
4. Conclusion
This research investigated the effect of base plate 
preheating during SLM on part density, crack formation, 
internal stresses, microstructure and mechanical properties for 
4 different materials (Al7075, Hastelloy X, H13 tool steel and 
CoCr).
It was found that an elevated base plate temperature 
provides an extra source of energy and densifies the SLM 
material when laser energy is insufficient to obtain a dense 
part. However, this densifying effect of preheating is less 
strong compared to the effect of main laser parameters such as 
laser power and scan speed, as was shown for the case of 
H13.
In some cases, such as for Al7075, application of 
preheating can also reduce the crack formation in the parts, 
though it may fail to completely prevent cracking. In the case
of Al7075, a change in crack morphology was obtained due to 
preheating at a temperature of 400°C.
Residual stresses can partly be controlled by application of 
preheating. Other factors such as phase transformations (e.g. 
the martensitic phase transformation in H13 steel), however, 
also largely affect stress formation in SLM parts. 
Microstructural changes due to application of preheating 
strongly depend on the processed material and its phase 
transformations. It was found that the precipitation in Al7075 
and the austenite-martensite transformation in H13 tool steel,
both occurring at temperatures lower than 400°C, induce large 
differences depending on the preheating temperatures applied 
during SLM. In contrast, when the investigated material has 
no transformation below the maximal preheating temperature, 
the effect of preheating is non-existing or less pronounced.
Lastly, it should be noted that the texture can still vary due 
to preheating below the material transformation temperatures, 
even when no clear change in tensile properties is observable 
(as shown for CoCr). Also, the prolonged exposure to a 
preheating temperature of 400°C can have a grain coarsening 
effect such as in the case of Hastelloy X.
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

R. Mertens  et al. / Procedia CIRP 74 (2018) 5–11
11
Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the KU Leuven GOA project SUMMA and from the 
Flemish projects SIM-ICON Expamet (IWT#120593) and 
SIM-SBO MultiMet (IWT#150010).
References
[1] Kempen K, Vrancken B, Buls S, Thijs L, Van Humbeeck J, Kruth J-P. 
Selective Laser Melting of Crack-Free High Density M2 High Speed 
Steel Parts by Baseplate Preheating. J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 2014; 
136:061026-6.
[2] Sander J, Hufenbach J, Giebeler L, Wendrock H, Kühn U, Eckert J. 
Microstructure and properties of FeCrMoVC tool steel produced by 
selective laser melting. Mater. Des. 2016; 89:335-41.
[3] Vrancken B, Buls S, Kruth J-P, Van Humbeeck J. Preheating of Selective 
Laser Melted Ti6Al4V: Microstructure and Mechanical Properties. 
Proceedings of the 13th World Conference on Titanium 2016; 1269-77.
[4] Mertens R, Vrancken B, Holmstock N, Kinds Y, Kruth JP, Van 
Humbeeck J. Influence of Powder Bed Preheating on Microstructure and 
Mechanical Properties of H13 Tool Steel SLM Parts. Physics Procedia 
2016; 83:882-90.
[5] Montero Sistiaga ML, Mertens R, Vrancken B, Wang X, Van Hooreweder 
B, Kruth J-P, Van Humbeeck J. Changing the alloy composition of 
Al7075 for better processability by selective laser melting. J. Mater.
Process. Technol. 2016; 238:437-45.
[6] Tomus D, Rometsch PA, Heilmaier M, Wu X. Effect of minor alloying 
elements on crack-formation characteristics of Hastelloy-X manufactured 
by selective laser melting. Addit. Manuf. 2017; 16:65-72.
[7] Hedberg YS, Qian B, Shen Z, Virtanen S, Odnevall Wallinder I. In vitro 
biocompatibility of CoCrMo dental alloys fabricated by selective laser 
melting. Dent. Mater. 2014; 30:525-34.
[8] Kajima Y, Takaichi A, Nakamoto T, Kimura T, Yogo Y, Ashida M, Doi 
H, Nomura N, Takahashi H, Hanawa T, Wakabayashi N. Fatigue strength 
of Co–Cr–Mo alloy clasps prepared by selective laser melting. J. Mech.
Behav. Biomed. Mater. 2016; 59:446-58.
[9] Liverani E, Fortunato A, Leardini A, Belvedere C, Siegler S, Ceschini L, 
Ascari A. Fabrication of Co–Cr–Mo endoprosthetic ankle devices by 
means of Selective Laser Melting (SLM). Mater. Des. 2016; 106:60-8.
[10] Takaichi A, Suyalatu, Nakamoto T, Joko N, Nomura N, Tsutsumi Y, 
Migita S, Doi H, Kurosu S, Chiba A, Wakabayashi N, Igarashi Y, 
Hanawa T. Microstructures and mechanical properties of Co–29Cr–6Mo 
alloy fabricated by selective laser melting process for dental applications.
J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 2013; 21:67-76.
[11] Thijs L, Kempen K, Kruth J-P, Van Humbeeck J. Fine-structured 
aluminium products with controllable texture by selective laser melting 
of pre-alloyed AlSi10Mg powder. Acta Mater. 2013; 61:1809-19.
[12] Zhou X, Li K, Zhang D, Liu X, Ma J, Liu W, Shen Z. Textures formed 
in a CoCrMo alloy by selective laser melting. J. Alloys Compd. 2015; 
631:153-64.
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.
